[[cleric]]
=== Cleric

[[class-features-2]]
==== Class Features

[[srd.cleric-table]]
.The Cleric
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/cleric.csv[]
|=================================

As a cleric, you gain the following class features.

[[hit-points-2]]
===== Hit Points

Hit Dice:: 
	1d8 per cleric level

Hit Points at 1st Level:: 
	8 + your Constitution modifier

Hit Points at Higher Levels:: 
	1d8 (or 5) + your Constitution modifier per cleric level after 1st

[[proficiencies-2]]
===== Proficiencies

Armor:: 
	Light armor, medium armor, shields

Weapons:: 
	Simple weapons

Tools:: 
	None

Saving Throws:: 
	Wisdom, Charisma

Skills:: 
	Choose two from History, Insight, Medicine, Persuasion, and Religion

[[equipment-2]]
===== Equipment

You start with the following equipment, in addition to the equipment
granted by your background:

* (__a__) a mace or (__b__) a warhammer (if proficient)
* (__a__) scale mail, (__b__) leather armor, or (__c__) chain mail (if
proficient)
* (__a__) a light crossbow and 20 bolts or (__b__) any simple weapon
* (__a__) a priest's pack or (__b__) an explorer's pack
* A shield and a holy symbol

[[spellcasting-1]]
===== Spellcasting

As a conduit for divine power, you can cast cleric spells.

[[cantrips-1]]
====== Cantrips

At 1st level, you know three cantrips of your choice from the cleric
spell list. You learn additional cleric cantrips of your choice at
higher levels, as shown in the Cantrips Known column of <<srd.cleric-table>>.

[[preparing-and-casting-spells]]
====== Preparing and Casting Spells

[[srd.cleric-spells-table]]
.Cleric Spell Slots per Level
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/cleric-spells.csv[]
|=================================

<<srd.cleric-spells-table>> shows how many spell slots you
have to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of these
spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's level or higher. You
regain all expended spell slots when you finish a long rest.

You prepare the list of cleric spells that are available for you to
cast, choosing from the cleric spell list. When you do so, choose a
number of cleric spells equal to your Wisdom modifier + your cleric
level (minimum of one spell). The spells must be of a level for which
you have spell slots.

For example, if you are a 3rd-level cleric, you have four 1st-level and
two 2nd-level spell slots. With a Wisdom of 16, your list of prepared
spells can include six spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination.
If you prepare the 1st-level spell link:#cure-wounds[_cure wounds_], you
can cast it using a 1st-level or 2nd-level slot. Casting the spell
doesn't remove it from your list of prepared spells.

You can change your list of prepared spells when you finish a long rest.
Preparing a new list of cleric spells requires time spent in prayer and
meditation: at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell on your
list.

[[spellcasting-ability-1]]
====== Spellcasting Ability

Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your cleric spells. The power of
your spells comes from your devotion to your deity. You use your Wisdom
whenever a cleric spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In
addition, you use your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw DC
for a cleric spell you cast and when making an attack roll with one.

Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Wisdom modifier

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + your Wisdom modifier

[[ritual-casting-1]]
====== Ritual Casting

You can cast a cleric spell as a ritual if that spell has the ritual tag
and you have the spell prepared.

[[spellcasting-focus-1]]
====== Spellcasting Focus

You can use a holy symbol (see "link:#equipment-13[Equipment]") as a
spellcasting focus for your cleric spells.

[[divine-domain]]
===== Divine Domain

Choose one domain (see "<<domains>>") related to your deity:
Knowledge, <<life-domain,Life>>, Light, Nature, Tempest, Trickery, or War. Each domain
provides examples of gods associated with it. Your choice grants you
domain spells and other features when you choose it at 1st level. It
also grants you additional ways to use <<channel-divinity>> when you gain
that feature at 2nd level, and additional benefits at 6th, 8th, and 17th
levels.

[[domain-spells]]
====== Domain Spells

Each domain has a list of spells—its domain spells—that you gain at the
cleric levels noted in the domain description. Once you gain a domain
spell, you always have it prepared, and it doesn't count against the
number of spells you can prepare each day.

If you have a domain spell that doesn't appear on the cleric spell list,
the spell is nonetheless a cleric spell for you.

[[channel-divinity]]
===== Channel Divinity

At 2nd level, you gain the ability to channel divine energy directly
from your deity, using that energy to fuel magical effects. You start
with two such effects: Turn Undead and an effect determined by your
domain. Some domains grant you additional effects as you advance in
levels, as noted in the domain description.

When you use your Channel Divinity, you choose which effect to create.
You must then finish a short or long rest to use your Channel Divinity
again.

Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws. When you use such
an effect from this class, the DC equals your cleric spell save DC.

Beginning at 6th level, you can use your Channel Divinity twice between
rests, and beginning at 18th level, you can use it three times between
rests. When you finish a short or long rest, you regain your expended
uses.

[[channel-divinity-turn-undead]]
====== Channel Divinity: Turn Undead

As an action, you present your holy symbol and speak a prayer censuring
the undead. Each undead that can see or hear you within 30 feet of you
must make a Wisdom saving throw. If the creature fails its saving throw,
it is turned for 1 minute or until it takes any damage.

A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move as far away from
you as it can, and it can't willingly move to a space within 30 feet of
you. It also can't take reactions. For its action, it can use only the
Dash action or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from
moving. If there's nowhere to move, the creature can use the Dodge
action.

[[ability-score-improvement-2]]
===== Ability Score Improvement

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, and 19th level,
you can increase one ability score of your choice by 2, or you can
increase two ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't
increase an ability score above 20 using this feature.

[[destroy-undead]]
===== Destroy Undead

Starting at 5th level, when an undead fails its saving throw against
your Turn Undead feature, the creature is instantly destroyed if its
challenge rating is at or below a certain threshold, as shown in <<srd.destroy-undead-table>>.

[[srd.destroy-undead-table]]
.Destroy Undead
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/cleric-destroy.csv[]
|=================================

[[divine-intervention]]
===== Divine Intervention

Beginning at 10th level, you can call on your deity to intervene on your
behalf when your need is great.

Imploring your deity's aid requires you to use your action. Describe the
assistance you seek, and roll percentile dice. If you roll a number
equal to or lower than your cleric level, your deity intervenes.

The GM chooses the nature of the intervention; the effect of any cleric
spell or cleric domain spell would be appropriate.

If your deity intervenes, you can't use this feature again for 7 days.
Otherwise, you can use it again after you finish a long rest.

At 20th level, your call for intervention succeeds automatically, no
roll required.

[[domains]]
==== Domains

[[life-domain]]
===== Life Domain

The Life domain focuses on the vibrant positive energy—one of the
fundamental forces of the universe—that sustains all life. The gods of
life (see link:#pantheons[Pantheons]) promote vitality and health
through healing the sick and wounded, caring for those in need, and
driving away the forces of death and undeath. Almost any non-evil deity
can claim influence over this domain, particularly agricultural deities
(such as Isis, The Daghdha, and Demeter), sun gods (such as Belenus,
Frey, and Re-Horakhty), gods of healing or endurance (such as Apollo,
Lugh, and Diancecht), and gods of home and community (such as Hestia,
Hathor, and Frigga).

.Life Domain Spells
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/cleric-life.csv[]
|=================================

[[bonus-proficiency]]
====== Bonus Proficiency

When you choose this domain at 1st level, you gain proficiency with
heavy armor.

[[disciple-of-life]]
====== Disciple of Life

Also starting at 1st level, your healing spells are more effective.
Whenever you use a spell of 1st level or higher to restore hit points to
a creature, the creature regains additional hit points equal to 2 + the
spell's level.

[[channel-divinity-preserve-life]]
====== Channel Divinity: Preserve Life

Starting at 2nd level, you can use your <<channel-divinity>> to heal the
badly injured.

As an action, you present your holy symbol and evoke healing energy that
can restore a number of hit points equal to five times your cleric
level.

Choose any creatures within 30 feet of you, and divide those hit points
among them. This feature can restore a creature to no more than half of
its hit point maximum. You can't use this feature on an undead or a
construct.

[[blessed-healer]]
====== Blessed Healer

Beginning at 6th level, the healing spells you cast on others heal you
as well. When you cast a spell of 1st level or higher that restores hit
points to a creature other than you, you regain hit points equal to 2 +
the spell's level.

[[divine-strike]]
====== Divine Strike

At 8th level, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon strikes with
divine energy. Once on each of your turns when you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, you can cause the attack to deal an extra 1d8 radiant
damage to the target. When you reach 14th level, the extra damage
increases to 2d8.

[[supreme-healing]]
====== Supreme Healing

Starting at 17th level, when you would normally roll one or more dice to
restore hit points with a spell, you instead use the highest number
possible for each die. For example, instead of restoring 2d6 hit points
to a creature, you restore 12.