[[druid]]
=== Druid

[[class-features-3]]
==== Class Features

[[srd.druid-table]]
.The Druid
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid.csv[]
|=================================

As a druid, you gain the following class features.

[[hit-points-3]]
===== Hit Points

Hit Dice:: 
	1d8 per druid level

Hit Points at 1st Level:: 
	8 + your Constitution modifier

Hit Points at Higher Levels:: 
	1d8 (or 5) + your Constitution modifier per druid level after 1st

[[proficiencies-3]]
===== Proficiencies

Armor:: 
	Light armor, medium armor, shields (druids will not wear armor or use shields made of metal)

Weapons:: 
	Clubs, daggers, darts, javelins, maces, quarterstaffs, scimitars, sickles, slings, spears

Tools:: 
	Herbalism kit

Saving Throws:: 
	Intelligence, Wisdom

Skills:: 
	Choose two from Arcana, Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Nature, Perception, Religion, and Survival

[[equipment-3]]
===== Equipment

You start with the following equipment, in addition to the equipment
granted by your background:

* (__a__) a wooden shield or (__b__) any simple weapon
* (__a__) a scimitar or (__b__) any simple melee weapon
* Leather armor, an explorer's pack, and a druidic focus

[[druidic]]
===== Druidic

You know Druidic, the secret language of druids. You can speak the
language and use it to leave hidden messages. You and others who know
this language automatically spot such a message. Others spot the
message's presence with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check but
can't decipher it without magic.

[[spellcasting-2]]
===== Spellcasting

Drawing on the divine essence of nature itself, you can cast spells to
shape that essence to your will.

[[cantrips-2]]
====== Cantrips

At 1st level, you know two cantrips of your choice from the druid spell
list. You learn additional druid cantrips of your choice at higher
levels, as shown in the Cantrips Known column of <<srd.druid-table>>.

[[preparing-and-casting-spells-1]]
====== Preparing and Casting Spells

[[srd.druid-spells-table]]
.Druid Spell Slots per Level
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid-spells.csv[]
|=================================

<<srd.druid-spells-table>> table shows how many spell slots you
have to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of these
druid spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's level or higher. You
regain all expended spell slots when you finish a long rest.

You prepare the list of druid spells that are available for you to cast,
choosing from the druid spell list. When you do so, choose a number of
druid spells equal to your Wisdom modifier + your druid level (minimum
of one spell). The spells must be of a level for which you have spell
slots.

For example, if you are a 3rd-level druid, you have four 1st-level and
two 2nd-level spell slots. With a Wisdom of 16, your list of prepared
spells can include six spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination.
If you prepare the 1st-level spell link:#cure-wounds[_cure wounds_], you
can cast it using a 1st-level or 2nd-level slot. Casting the spell
doesn't remove it from your list of prepared spells.

You can also change your list of prepared spells when you finish a long
rest. Preparing a new list of druid spells requires time spent in prayer
and meditation: at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell on your
list.

[[spellcasting-ability-2]]
====== Spellcasting Ability

Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your druid spells, since your
magic draws upon your devotion and attunement to nature. You use your
Wisdom whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In
addition, you use your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw DC
for a druid spell you cast and when making an attack roll with one.

Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Wisdom modifier

Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + your Wisdom modifier

[[ritual-casting-2]]
====== Ritual Casting

You can cast a druid spell as a ritual if that spell has the ritual tag
and you have the spell prepared.

[[spellcasting-focus-2]]
====== Spellcasting Focus

You can use a druidic focus (see link:#equipment-14[Equipment]) as a
spellcasting focus for your druid spells.

[[wild-shape]]
===== Wild Shape

Starting at 2nd level, you can use your action to magically assume the
shape of a beast that you have seen before. You can use this feature
twice. You regain expended uses when you finish a short or long rest.

Your druid level determines the beasts you can transform into, as shown
in <<srd.beast-shapes-table>>. At 2nd level, for example, you can transform
into any beast that has a challenge rating of 1/4 or lower that doesn't
have a flying or swimming speed.

[[srd.beast-shapes-table]]
.Beast Shapes
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid-beast.csv[]
|=================================

You can stay in a beast shape for a number of hours equal to half your
druid level (rounded down). You then revert to your normal form unless
you expend another use of this feature. You can revert to your normal
form earlier by using a bonus action on your turn. You automatically
revert if you fall unconscious, drop to 0 hit points, or die.

While you are transformed, the following rules apply:

* Your game statistics are replaced by the statistics of the beast, but
	you retain your alignment, personality, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and
	Charisma scores. You also retain all of your skill and saving throw
	proficiencies, in addition to gaining those of the creature. If the
	creature has the same proficiency as you and the bonus in its stat block
	is higher than yours, use the creature's bonus instead of yours. If the
	creature has any legendary or lair actions, you can't use them.
* When you transform, you assume the beast's hit points and Hit Dice.
	When you revert to your normal form, you return to the number of hit
	points you had before you transformed. However, if you revert as a
	result of dropping to 0 hit points, any excess damage carries over to
	your normal form. For example, if you take 10 damage in animal form and
	have only 1 hit point left, you revert and take 9 damage. As long as the
	excess damage doesn't reduce your normal form to 0 hit points, you
	aren't knocked unconscious.
* You can't cast spells, and your ability to speak or take any action
	that requires hands is limited to the capabilities of your beast form.
	Transforming doesn't break your concentration on a spell you've already
	cast, however, or prevent you from taking actions that are part of a
	spell, such as link:#call-lightning[_call lightning_], that you've
	already cast.
* You retain the benefit of any features from your class, race, or other
	source and can use them if the new form is physically capable of doing
	so. However, you can't use any of your special senses, such as
	darkvision, unless your new form also has that sense.
* You choose whether your equipment falls to the ground in your space,
	merges into your new form, or is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as
	normal, but the GM decides whether it is practical for the new form to
	wear a piece of equipment, based on the creature's shape and size. Your
	equipment doesn't change size or shape to match the new form, and any
	equipment that the new form can't wear must either fall to the ground or
	merge with it. Equipment that merges with the form has no effect until
	you leave the form.

[[druid-circle]]
===== Druid Circle

At 2nd level, you choose to identify with a circle of druids (see
"<<druid-circles>>"). Your choice grants you features at
2nd level and again at 6th, 10th, and 14th level.

[[timeless-body]]
===== Timeless Body

Starting at 18th level, the primal magic that you wield causes you to
age more slowly. For every 10 years that pass, your body ages only 1
year.

[[ability-score-improvement-3]]
===== Ability Score Improvement

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th, and 19th level,
you can increase one ability score of your choice by 2, or you can
increase two ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't
increase an ability score above 20 using this feature.

[[beast-spells]]
===== Beast Spells

Beginning at 18th level, you can cast many of your druid spells in any
shape you assume using <<wild-shape>>. You can perform the somatic and
verbal components of a druid spell while in a beast shape, but you
aren't able to provide material components.

[[archdruid]]
===== Archdruid

At 20th level, you can use your <<wild-shape>> an unlimited number of times.

Additionally, you can ignore the verbal and somatic components of your
druid spells, as well as any material components that lack a cost and
aren't consumed by a spell. You gain this benefit in both your normal
shape and your beast shape from <<wild-shape>>.

[[sacred-plants-and-wood]]
.Sacred Plants and Wood
****
A druid holds certain plants to be sacred, particularly alder, ash,
birch, elder, hazel, holly, juniper, mistletoe, oak, rowan, willow, and
yew. Druids often use such plants as part of a spellcasting focus,
incorporating lengths of oak or yew or sprigs of mistletoe.

Similarly, a druid uses such woods to make other objects, such as
weapons and shields. Yew is associated with death and rebirth, so weapon
handles for scimitars or sickles might be fashioned from it. Ash is
associated with life and oak with strength. These woods make excellent
hafts or whole weapons, such as clubs or quarterstaffs, as well as
shields. Alder is associated with air, and it might be used for thrown
weapons, such as darts or javelins.

Druids from regions that lack the plants described here have chosen
other plants to take on similar uses. For instance, a druid of a desert
region might value the yucca tree and cactus plants.
****

[[druids-and-the-gods]]
.Druids and the Gods
****
Some druids venerate the forces of nature themselves, but most druids
are devoted to one of the many nature deities worshiped in the
multiverse (the lists of gods in the "link:#pantheons[Pantheons]"
section include many such deities). The worship of these deities is
often considered a more ancient tradition than the faiths of clerics and
urbanized peoples.
****

[[druid-circles]]
==== Druid Circles

[[circle-of-the-land]]
===== Circle of the Land

The Circle of the Land is made up of mystics and sages who safeguard
ancient knowledge and rites through a vast oral tradition. These druids
meet within sacred circles of trees or standing stones to whisper primal
secrets in <<druidic>>. The circle's wisest members preside as the chief
priests of communities that hold to the Old Faith and serve as advisors
to the rulers of those folk. As a member of this circle, your magic is
influenced by the land where you were initiated into the circle's
mysterious rites.

[[bonus-cantrip]]
====== Bonus Cantrip

When you choose this circle at 2nd level, you learn one additional druid
cantrip of your choice.

[[natural-recovery]]
====== Natural Recovery

Starting at 2nd level, you can regain some of your magical energy by
sitting in meditation and communing with nature. During a short rest,
you choose expended spell slots to recover. The spell slots can have a
combined level that is equal to or less than half your druid level
(rounded up), and none of the slots can be 6th level or higher. You
can't use this feature again until you finish a long rest.

For example, when you are a 4th-level druid, you can recover up to two
levels worth of spell slots. You can recover either a 2nd-level slot or
two 1st-level slots.

[[circle-spells]]
====== Circle Spells

Your mystical connection to the land infuses you with the ability to
cast certain spells. At 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 9th level you gain access to
circle spells connected to the land where you became a druid. Choose
that land—<<srd.arctic-spells-table,arctic>>, <<srd.coast-spells-table,coast>>, 
<<srd.desert-spells-table,desert>>, <<srd.forest-spells-table,forest>>, 
<<srd.grassland-spells-table,grassland>>, <<srd.mountain-spells-table,mountain>>, or
<<srd.swamp-spells-table,swamp>>—and consult the associated list of spells.

Once you gain access to a circle spell, you always have it prepared, and
it doesn't count against the number of spells you can prepare each day.
If you gain access to a spell that doesn't appear on the druid spell
list, the spell is nonetheless a druid spell for you.

[[srd.arctic-spells-table]]
.Arctic
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid-arctic.csv[]
|=================================

[[srd.coast-spells-table]]
.Coast
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid-coast.csv[]
|=================================

[[srd.desert-spells-table]]
.Desert
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid-desert.csv[]
|=================================

[[srd.forest-spells-table]]
.Forest
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid-forest.csv[]
|=================================

[[srd.grassland-spells-table]]
.Grassland
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid-grassland.csv[]
|=================================

[[srd.mountain-spells-table]]
.Mountain
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid-mountain.csv[]
|=================================

[[srd.swamp-spells-table]]
.Swamp
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/druid-swamp.csv[]
|=================================

[[lands-stride]]
====== Land's Stride

Starting at 6th level, moving through nonmagical difficult terrain costs
you no extra movement. You can also pass through nonmagical plants
without being slowed by them and without taking damage from them if they
have thorns, spines, or a similar hazard.

In addition, you have advantage on saving throws against plants that are
magically created or manipulated to impede movement, such those created
by the link:#entangle[_entangle_] spell.

[[natures-ward]]
====== Nature's Ward

When you reach 10th level, you can't be charmed or frightened by
elementals or fey, and you are immune to poison and disease.

[[natures-sanctuary]]
====== Nature's Sanctuary

When you reach 14th level, creatures of the natural world sense your
connection to nature and become hesitant to attack you. When a beast or
plant creature attacks you, that creature must make a Wisdom saving
throw against your druid spell save DC. On a failed save, the creature
must choose a different target, or the attack automatically misses. On a
successful save, the creature is immune to this effect for 24 hours.

The creature is aware of this effect before it makes its attack against
you.