[[rogue]]
=== Rogue

[[class-features-8]]
==== Class Features

[[srd.rogue-table]]
.The Rogue
[format="csv",options="header",grid="none"]
|=================================
include::./tables/rogue.csv[]
|=================================

As a rogue, you have the following class features.

[[hit-points-8]]
===== Hit Points

Hit Dice:: 
	1d8 per rogue level

Hit Points at 1st Level:: 
	8 + your Constitution modifier

Hit Points at Higher Levels:: 
	1d8 (or 5) + your Constitution modifier
per rogue level after 1st

[[proficiencies-8]]
===== Proficiencies

Armor:: 
	Light armor

Weapons:: 
	Simple weapons, hand crossbows, longswords, rapiers,
shortswords

Tools:: 
	Thieves' tools

Saving Throws:: 
	Dexterity, Intelligence

Skills:: 
	Choose four from Acrobatics, Athletics, Deception, Insight,
Intimidation, Investigation, Perception, Performance, Persuasion,
Sleight of Hand, and Stealth

[[equipment-8]]
===== Equipment

You start with the following equipment, in addition to the equipment
granted by your background:

* (__a__) a rapier or (__b__) a shortsword
* (__a__) a shortbow and quiver of 20 arrows or (__b__) a shortsword
* (__a__) a burglar's pack, (__b__) a dungeoneer's pack, or (__c__) an
explorer's pack
* (__a__) Leather armor, two daggers, and thieves' tools

[[expertise-1]]
===== Expertise

At 1st level, choose two of your skill proficiencies, or one of your
skill proficiencies and your proficiency with thieves' tools. Your
proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check you make that uses
either of the chosen proficiencies.

At 6th level, you can choose two more of your proficiencies (in skills
or with thieves' tools) to gain this benefit.

[[sneak-attack]]
===== Sneak Attack

Beginning at 1st level, you know how to strike subtly and exploit a
foe's distraction. Once per turn, you can deal an extra 1d6 damage to
one creature you hit with an attack if you have advantage on the attack
roll. The attack must use a finesse or a ranged weapon.

You don't need advantage on the attack roll if another enemy of the
target is within 5 feet of it, that enemy isn't incapacitated, and you
don't have disadvantage on the attack roll.

The amount of the extra damage increases as you gain levels in this
class, as shown in the Sneak Attack column of <<srd.rogue-table>>.

[[thieves-cant]]
===== Thieves' Cant

During your rogue training you learned thieves' cant, a secret mix of
dialect, jargon, and code that allows you to hide messages in seemingly
normal conversation. Only another creature that knows thieves' cant
understands such messages. It takes four times longer to convey such a
message than it does to speak the same idea plainly.

In addition, you understand a set of secret signs and symbols used to
convey short, simple messages, such as whether an area is dangerous or
the territory of a thieves' guild, whether loot is nearby, or whether
the people in an area are easy marks or will provide a safe house for
thieves on the run.

[[cunning-action]]
===== Cunning Action

Starting at 2nd level, your quick thinking and agility allow you to move
and act quickly. You can take a bonus action on each of your turns in
combat. This action can be used only to take the Dash, Disengage, or
Hide action.

[[roguish-archetype]]
===== Roguish Archetype

At 3rd level, you choose an archetype (see "<<roguish-archetypes>>") that you emulate in the
exercise of your rogue abilities. Your archetype choice grants you
features at 3rd level and then again at 9th, 13th, and 17th level.

[[ability-score-improvement-8]]
===== Ability Score Improvement

When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 10th, 12th, 16th, and 19th
level, you can increase one ability score of your choice by 2, or you
can increase two ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you
can't increase an ability score above 20 using this feature.

[[uncanny-dodge]]
===== Uncanny Dodge

Starting at 5th level, when an attacker that you can see hits you with
an attack, you can use your reaction to halve the attack's damage
against you.

[[evasion-1]]
===== Evasion

Beginning at 7th level, you can nimbly dodge out of the way of certain
area effects, such as a red dragon's fiery breath or an
link:#ice-storm[_ice storm_] spell. When you are subjected to an effect
that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half
damage, you instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving throw,
and only half damage if you fail.

[[reliable-talent]]
===== Reliable Talent

By 11th level, you have refined your chosen skills until they approach
perfection. Whenever you make an ability check that lets you add your
proficiency bonus, you can treat a d20 roll of 9 or lower as a 10.

[[blindsense]]
===== Blindsense

Starting at 14th level, if you are able to hear, you are aware of the
location of any hidden or invisible creature within 10 feet of you.

[[slippery-mind]]
===== Slippery Mind

By 15th level, you have acquired greater mental strength. You gain
proficiency in Wisdom saving throws.

[[elusive]]
===== Elusive

Beginning at 18th level, you are so evasive that attackers rarely gain
the upper hand against you. No attack roll has advantage against you
while you aren't incapacitated.

[[stroke-of-luck]]
===== Stroke of Luck

At 20th level, you have an uncanny knack for succeeding when you need
to. If your attack misses a target within range, you can turn the miss
into a hit. Alternatively, if you fail an ability check, you can treat
the d20 roll as a 20.

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a
short or long rest.

[[roguish-archetypes]]
==== Roguish Archetypes

Rogues have many features in common, including their emphasis on
perfecting their skills, their precise and deadly approach to combat,
and their increasingly quick reflexes. But different rogues steer those
talents in varying directions, embodied by the rogue archetypes. Your
choice of archetype is a reflection of your focusâ€”not necessarily an
indication of your chosen profession, but a description of your
preferred techniques.

[[thief]]
===== Thief

You hone your skills in the larcenous arts. Burglars, bandits,
cutpurses, and other criminals typically follow this archetype, but so
do rogues who prefer to think of themselves as professional treasure
seekers, explorers, delvers, and investigators. In addition to improving
your agility and stealth, you learn skills useful for delving into
ancient ruins, reading unfamiliar languages, and using magic items you
normally couldn't employ.

[[fast-hands]]
====== Fast Hands

Starting at 3rd level, you can use the bonus action granted by your
<<cunning-action>> to make a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check, use your
thieves' tools to disarm a trap or open a lock, or take the Use an
Object action.

[[second-story-work]]
====== Second-Story Work

When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you gain the ability to
climb faster than normal; climbing no longer costs you extra movement.

In addition, when you make a running jump, the distance you cover
increases by a number of feet equal to your Dexterity modifier.

[[supreme-sneak]]
====== Supreme Sneak

Starting at 9th level, you have advantage on a Dexterity (Stealth) check
if you move no more than half your speed on the same turn.

[[use-magic-device]]
====== Use Magic Device

By 13th level, you have learned enough about the workings of magic that
you can improvise the use of items even when they are not intended for
you. You ignore all class, race, and level requirements on the use of
magic items.

[[thiefs-reflexes]]
====== Thief's Reflexes

When you reach 17th level, you have become adept at laying ambushes and
quickly escaping danger. You can take two turns during the first round
of any combat. You take your first turn at your normal initiative and
your second turn at your initiative minus 10. You can't use this feature
when you are surprised.